On his first night at the Brooklyn homeless shelter, Tin Chin met his best friend.

Estranged from his family, Mr. Chin was alone, stewing in anger and shame over all he had lost and how low he had fallen. The Chinatown restaurants he frequented with his wife and daughter, the elementary school drop-off routine, the friendly neighbors in Queens — these had been the trappings of a middle-class life that once seemed secure. A college graduate and former civil servant, Mr. Chin had to learn his city anew, and now — he could still hardly believe it — as a homeless person.

On that evening in 2012 in the Barbara Kleiman Residence in East Williamsburg, he saw only one other Chinese person in the room. The man was skinny, his ill-fitting clothes hanging loosely on his frame. Mr. Chin sized him up with an expert eye: an immigrant, most likely from Fujian Province; no family, no English, no documents.

“I’m at the bottom,” Mr. Chin remembers thinking. “But I’m better off than him.” 

The other man was named Mo Lin. Mr. Chin sensed that if they had met just a few years earlier, they would have had very little in common. “At the beginning, I can’t say I liked him,” he said. “But we are the two Chinese people in the shelter, so we talk.”

Mr. Chin possessed little more than his closely guarded secrets, including a criminal record that haunted him. They ran through his mind on a loop, but he divulged them to no one, certainly not this new acquaintance, and instead shared his story in broad strokes — he was born in Hong Kong and had grown up in New York and was new to being homeless.

Mr. Lin was hesitant and didn’t say much. It would be a while before he described his years scraping by in New York. He was indeed undocumented, and although he had worked in innumerable Chinatown kitchens, his poor health had long ago made steady work impossible, and he looked far older than his 46 years. He spent his days shuffling along the streets of Manhattan’s Chinatown, smoking cigarettes on the sidewalk, watching staticky TV in threadbare Fujianese community centers.

But the men soon began spending so much time together — always chatting in the shelter, strolling downtown streets, sharing plates of noodles — that acquaintances assumed they were family.

“We called them brothers,” said Mireille Massac, a Brooklyn food bank organizer who spent time with them. “He took care of Mo. What Mo needed, it went through Tin.”

Friendships can be hard to memorialize — relatives, partners, children often take pride of place. But a friendship can be the defining bond in a person’s life, offering a kinship that family cannot, a refuge through lonely, hungry days.

And can a friendship offer redemption for your worst mistakes? A decade after their first night in the shelter, Mr. Chin wonders about that.


***

The shelter rules said everyone had to be out by 8 a.m., and Mr. Chin and Mr. Lin developed a routine. They headed to Chinatown together, where they would buy dim sum, dumplings — whatever Mr. Chin could afford on the $200 he received through public assistance every month. Mr. Lin’s favorite meal was the fish sandwich from McDonald’s. He had unrelenting dental problems, and the soft filet was easy to chew.

They often ate in a leafy park on the edge of Chinatown, sharing a bench and watching the neighborhood swirl. Some days, they went to the library, where Mr. Chin introduced his friend to the internet and the bottomless well of YouTube. Mr. Lin was drawn to old Chinese war movies.

Adrift in his own life, Mr. Chin found purpose in helping his new friend. “I’m playing a white knight role here,” he remembers thinking to himself as they became closer. It had been a long time since he had been anyone’s white knight.

Over time, it became clear Mr. Lin had hardly explored New York. Mr. Chin appointed himself personal tour guide.

Their first outing was Coney Island, Mr. Chin remembered. They took the subway to the end of the line to see the aquarium. Mr. Chin had been there for school trips as a kid, and he took his wife there on a date — sweet memories laced with an acrid burn he kept to himself. Now he focused on Mr. Lin, who had never seen an aquarium before. The sea creatures, the colorful fish, the calming quiet of the underwater world astonished his friend and delighted Mr. Chin. “His eyes were really amazed,” Mr. Chin said.

They walked along the boardwalk and bought hot dogs for lunch. For that afternoon, it felt like their lives extended beyond shelter curfews and park benches. They were New Yorkers, this was their city and maybe they would have another hot dog, why not. Mr. Chin was buying.

They kept exploring New York, two homeless men in a postcard-perfect montage. They took the Staten Island Ferry, where the view from the deck reduces the skyline to a Tinkertoy city you can scoop into your hands. They tried the Metropolitan Museum of Art, but Mr. Lin grew bored after a couple of floors and they quickly decamped for Central Park. But the Bronx Zoo was a hit.

“Especially the tiger,” Mr. Chin recalled. “The tiger really came out, it was the first tiger he ever saw. Everything was the first thing he ever saw.”

New York adventures became part of their friendship, which deepened over time. Lawyers, aid workers and friends who met them marveled at their devotion to each other. Extensive details of their years together were also left behind in grainy snapshots, police reports, immigration forms, nonprofit records, court transcripts and old emails.

One December, they even went to Macy’s in Midtown to see Santa Claus.

They stood in line, two middle-aged homeless men towering above a sea of children. If any parents looked at them sideways, Mr. Chin didn’t notice or care. They finally made it to the front for a photo with Santa. In it, Mr. Chin sits on the right, beaming. On the other side of Santa, Mr. Lin sits more stiffly, his hands clasped in his lap, his puffy coat zipped to his collar. He smiles slightly, unsure quite what to do.

Before they left, Mr. Chin translated his friend’s wish for Santa: a green card.